So far, we have considered metrics that are focused on individual documents.
Given that financial documents are released periodically,
it will be useful to quantify changes of these documents over time.
We could simply track the readability index or negative sentiments over time.
But this metrics tend to capture one specific feature of a document.
It would be nice to find a way to directly compare two documents.
Why is this useful? Well, a significant change in financial documents from
one period to the next might indicate changes in the market or company structure,
and could lead to extra risks for the underlying stock.
How do we compare the two documents?
This is where similarity metrics come in.
This metrics convert two documents into a number representing the degree of similarity.
To construct these metrics,
we can use TF-IDF.
We can convert a document into a list of TF-IDF weights,
which converts each document into a vector.
Now that we have vectors,
we can use linear algebra to construct this matrix.
One common metric, is the cosine similarity.
Think of two documents as two vectors in space.
The cosine similarity is simply the cosine of the angle between the two vectors.
Mathematically, this is the dot product of
the two vectors divided by the product of their length.
You might ask, why do we use the angle instead of say,
the distance between the two vectors?
This is because the concept of length doesn't really make sense intuitively.
So, using angles removes the dependence on the length of vectors.
Another common metric, is the Jaccard similarity metric.
We can understand it intuitively by thinking of each vector as a histogram.
Here we see each vector or histogram in the same plot.
Then, we construct the new histogram by comparing them.
To construct the minimum histogram,
we take the minimum of the two.
Then, we construct the maximum histogram by comparing the two.
If vectors u and v are the same,
the minimum and maximum histogram will be the same.
The Jaccard similarity, is simply the volume of
the min histogram over the volume of the max histogram.
There is another way of interpreting the Jaccard similarity.
We can think of the histograms as sets.
So, the volume of the minimum histogram can also be
thought of as the volume of the intersection of the two sets.
Similarly, the volume of the maximum histogram can be
thought of as the volume of the union of the two sets.
The Jaccard similarity can be rewritten as the size
of the intersection of the two sets over the size of the union of the two sets.
Now, there are many other similarity metrics we haven't covered.
Some are based on heuristics,
like the minimal number of edits to transform one document into another document.
This metrics may or may not be useful,
and I encourage you to explore them and experiment.